# Ecological and morphological traits as determinants of extinction risk in reef coral species	
_(in preparation)_

Nussaïbah B. Raja, Andreas Lauchstedt, John M. Pandolfi, Sun W. Kim, Ann F. Budd, Wolfgang Kiessling

The responses of life history traits to the spatial variation in environmental conditions and biotic interactions influence the fitness of organisms and shape their ecological niches. We performed a quantitative assessment of the link between reef coral traits and species extinction risk as reported by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). To achieve this, we used predictive models incorporating the life history and ecological traits alongside threat information derived from the IUCN Red List. We constructed the models using an Automatic Machine Learning algorithm trained on reef coral species of known status. Our model derived from 791 coral species yielded  > 70% accuracy in predicting the IUCN threat status. We used this model to predict the threat status of 173 data-deficient coral species and validated our model using data on fossil corals during the Plio-Pleistocene. Our model shows that 40% of the data-deficient species are at threat, increasing the estimated proportion of threatened corals, especially in the Indo-Pacific. There was, however, a mismatch (~50 %) between our modelled extinction risk and observed extinctions during the Plio-Pleistocene. This suggests that the IUCN status for reef corals may not accurately reflect true extinction risk. Future assessments should place stronger emphasis on traits.